Welcome to Future Histories, my name is Jan Groos and what you're about to hear today is the second part of my conversation with Robin Annal on Paracon, Participatory Economics.
Today we are going to talk about some of the elements that have been introduced quite recently, actually in the 2021 book called Democratic Economic Planning.
And these are, for example, investment planning, environmental and educational planning.
We will also talk about some of the critical aspects of Paracon.
Personally, I am not a big fan of the effort rating committees, for example, and I really enjoyed covering these aspects as well, those that I feel more skeptic towards.
And I highly appreciate that Robin is quite open when it comes to these aspects as well.
So we cover a lot of ground in this second part of the conversation.
The chapter on reproductive labor in the recent book Democratic Economic Planning has been co-authored by Savina Choudhury.
And I would like to feature her on Future Histories as well.
This is why the topic of reproductive labor is not featured in today's episode with Robin, but will hopefully be in depth when I talk to Savina.
Since this is still quite new, I'd like to refer you to a new feature of Future Histories, a feature specifically for the international audience.
We created an English episodes only RSS feed that you can subscribe to in your podcast app, as well as a newly created English version of the homepage.
So please find the links in the show notes and share it among your friends, your English speaking friends.
Thank you so much. And speaking of thanks, thank you, David and Wilfried for your kind donations.
And I would like to welcome Heiner as a patron of Future Histories.
Thank you so much for your support as well.
But now please enjoy today's episode with Robin Hannell on participatory economics.
So let's start with the more macro questions, because in the more recent work, you incorporate long term planning into the model of Paracom.
And this also means that before the annual participatory planning procedure, before this begins, certain decisions have already been made.
A participatory investment plan has determined the amount of each capital good that must be produced during the year.
The second one would be a long run education and environmental plan that has determined the natural resource, the resources that can be used throughout the production cycle.
And the third one would be, as you just mentioned, a strategic international economic plan that has determined the amounts of different goods that will be exported and imported during the year.
And another macro question that has to be addressed in Paracom as well would be the question of reproductive labor.
I imagine that it will be difficult that we already talked for a long time, so it will be difficult to address each of these sections in detail.
But maybe you could give us an idea of how would Paracom try to address this, the special attention that those sectors need in each of these categories?
Right, there's a lot to cover. And the first thing I'd like to say is that all of these issues are ones that we didn't talk about for a long, long time.
For, I mean, the original publications of some of the idea of a participatory economy, that was 1990.
And it really isn't until 2021, when democratic economic planning was published, that we tackled all these issues, at least in public.
I mean, it's not like we hadn't been talking about them. We hadn't gone into print with proposals.
And there was a reason for that. I mean, the reason for that was we thought, first, we have to sort of get straight about whether we're talking about a market socialist economy or some sort of central planning.
Is there really an alternative? And in that context, talking about the annual planning procedure, as well as talking about some really important things that socialist, I mean,
no practicing socialist economies had ever really put into practice, things like balancing for desirability, balancing for empowerment, and, of course, dealing with the age-old issue of what's a fair system of rewarding people.
So we had talked about all those things, and we knew that that leaves a lot of decisions, sort of a lot of important subject areas, unaddressed.
The reason it's important to say this before starting is everything that we're now going to talk about, I consider to be unvetted.
This hasn't been discussed and argued and criticized for 10, 20, 30 years the way a bunch of other things have.
So we've sort of had a more or less full debate out there in the literature, whereas these things, my own attitude toward them is, hey, we're just throwing these out here for the first time.
I haven't heard people coming up with objections yet. I don't even know how I'm going to feel once I start hearing that.
So in some sense, one of the implications of this is the first time we've actually put something out there is I honestly feel less secure and sure about it.
I can't even promise you how much I will continue to defend it 10 years from now.
So I wanted to say that just to begin with. There are some really important problems that you have to deal with when you're doing long-term planning over time that you don't have to deal with when you're doing the annual plan.
When we do the annual plan, presumably workers councils know what their technological options are.
They know what different technologies they currently have available to them, and presumably consumers have some idea of what their preferences are.
So those are given, those things we know when we set up a system to do annual planning, but who knows what preferences of people are going to be 20 years from now?
And who knows what technologies will become available? What new technologies will become available?
But if you want to make an efficient plan about anything over 10 or 20 years, you have to actually know those things.
So there's a whole bunch of things that that means that part of what will determine what is an efficient investment is what you're going to do.
So there's a whole bunch of things that that means that part of what will determine what is an efficient investment plan or education plan or environmental plan, part of what will determine whether this plan is efficient or not is
What sort of technological change has taken place over these will occur in the future? And if there are changes in people's preferences, what those will be like in the future?
Somebody is going to have to estimate those. And when you estimate those, you're going to make mistakes.
So these are all problems that long term planning, you know, face that annual planning does not face.
And then there's another problem. If we want the planning process to be democratic, we would like everybody who's going to be affected by the plan to participate.
Well, people who aren't born yet can't participate.
So you have, if you set up a democratic process for coming up with long term plans, you have to address who's going to speak for the unborn generations.
And so we started with this part of the reason that we delayed as long as we did, even coming up with proposals that we recognize that while the general principle that you want the decisions to be made in a participatory way,
you want decisions to be self managed, you want the process to be fair, you want it to be efficient, the principles are all the same, but there's extra problems.
And I think those are the things that are sort of important to get out there just right from the very beginning.
So what we proposed is a procedure for going about what we simply call investment planning.
When we think of investment planning, we're basically thinking of this year we could produce consumption goods, but this year we could also produce what are typically called capital goods or investment goods.
Well, when we produce a capital good or an investment good this year, it doesn't do anybody this year any good at all.
So why would you do that?
Because if you produce capital or investment goods next year, you'll be able to produce more goods than you could this year.
So investment planning is basically a decision about, and most capital goods or investment goods basically last for figure a decade.
So what's the time length that makes sort of sense for investment planning?
And the answer is sort of think in terms of a decade.
So if we make a new machine this year, it's probably going to either be worn out or obsolete 10 years from now.
That's why 10 year time period is sort of a sensible period for investment planning.
Education planning, that's not the case.
I mean, how long does it take to educate somebody?
Well, 18 years gets you through high school.
Another four and maybe two more for graduate school in some cases.
And then we have a whole process of sort of lifetime learning that goes on.
So if you're talking about education planning, used to be called manpower planning, by the way.
But we can't do that anymore, thank heavens.
But when you say education planning, when you use the word manpower planning, it was clear that you also didn't just consider the formal education system.
You were also considering any sort of education and training procedures that worker councils were setting up for themselves.
So at least the old term manpower planning, while sexist, at least focus people's attention on the fact that this is a combination of the formal education system.
And inside the economy itself, we have an awful lot of education and training that goes on.
So that's a process that's going to stretch over three or four decades, at least.
And when you talk about environmental planning, we need to plan 50 to 100 years out.
So the timeframes are quite different in these regards.
So we've identified that there's very different timeframes.
We've identified that we know what we're trying to achieve here.
We want the plans to be efficient.
We want the process for settling on the plans to be as participatory as possible and democratic.
And in terms of equity, in this case, we're kind of talking about generational equity.
So the first thing we do is make a proposal about how to incentivize the present generation.
We're the only people who can sit down to make a long term plan.
When they're sitting down to make it, it's the present generation that's going to make it.
How can you incentivize them to seriously take into account the interests of future generations?
And we propose that before you do any kind of long term planning at all,
that the present generation has to discuss and vote on what we call a generational equity constraint.
And what the generational equity constraint says is this.
There has to be a limit on how much aggregate consumption can differ from one year to the next.
Here's a dilemma.
Suppose we sit down and we calculate an efficient investment plan.
And because technical change is going to be very, very robust,
it turns out that the efficient investment plan means that consumption in early years is going to be much less the consumption in late years.
There was an example of a country that actually did do a very unfair investment plan.
Stalin's Soviet Union invested such a high percentage during the 1930s and the 1940s
that they literally starved many people in early generations.
Now, you can argue with hindsight that given World War II and Hitler's onslaught,
maybe it's a good thing for human civilization that they did that.
Because it was really the Soviet Union that broke the back of the Nazism.
And had they not been investing 35 percent of GDP during the 1930s,
it's unlikely that they would have managed to resist.
So you can look back and, but clearly there's a problem here.
There's a generational equity problem.
If you invest too much, it may be that when you look at efficiency,
that it would lead you to invest so much that it really is unfair to early generations.
Well, the early generations present, they should be able to take care of that.
And presumably the early generation in the Soviet Union wouldn't have voted to let Stalin do to them what he did.
But in any case, to protect themselves from that, all they have to do is say,
well, we don't accept the long-term plan where consumption this year,
where consumption next year is more than four percent higher than consumption this year.
I'm talking about aggregate consumption.
So they could protect themselves by doing that.
What we have proposed is a way that when they protect themselves,
they will also simultaneously protect future generations who are not present.
That same four percent is going to be used to say, oh,
but it also is unacceptable if present consumption is four percent higher than future consumption.
Why might that happen in an efficient plan when you're making up an efficient plan?
Well, suppose that the environment is deteriorating very rapidly.
That might mean that it's actually hard for future generations to live at the same level that earlier generations are.
Or suppose technological progress is just very low.
So the generational equity constraint, the idea of it is to say,
when we design procedures to come up with the efficient plan, it still might be an unacceptable plan.
It might be unfair to future generations.
It might be unfair to present generation.
And we're going to eliminate that possibility before we even draw the plan up,
before anybody knows what the plan is going to look like.
We're going to basically say consumption in any two adjacent years cannot differ by more than four percent,
no matter in which direction.
So that's our proposal.
And I don't think anybody else has ever suggested something like this.
And as I said, this is unvetted.
But at least it's a serious attempt to take efficient long term,
to recognize one potential problem when you're doing efficient long term planning.
And that is it might inadvertently be unfair to either present generations compared to future generations or vice versa.
So that's that's the first thing.
Then the question reduces to what are the different terms in terms of benefits and the costs that you would take into account when you're doing different kinds of planning?
The only thing you have to take into account when you're doing investment planning for capital goods or investment goods is this consumption in every year.
And these capital goods contribute to consumption.
There are no particular other benefits that come from producing a machine or we can produce shoe making machines or we can produce shoes.
And the only benefits that come from from shoe making machines are just more shoes at a different time period.
That's not true for education.
And that's not true for the environment.
I mean, as a lifetime educator, I don't think the primary purpose of education is producing a more productive workforce.
I think it's the primary purpose of education is enabling people to enjoy life more fully.
And I also think a primary purpose of education is preparing everybody to participate democratically in every kind of decision making, including economic decision making.
So those are benefits from educate from investing in education that go that are above and beyond an additional that really are not benefits that from making more machines.
So the first thing you have to do is you have to sit down and figure out, well, what are all the benefits that come from more education and who would be best suited to estimating what those are likely to be?
And then you have to weigh that against the cost of investing in anything.
And the cost of investing in anything today is there's less consumption today.
So you can write up the efficiency conditions for education.
You can write up the efficiency conditions for what's the efficient amount to invest in machines.
And the same thing holds for the environment.
So in the case of the environment, you know, environmental economists spend a tremendous amount of time trying to estimate what they call the use value of environmental amenities to consumers.
So the environment plays a role in production when you think of the environment as being natural capital.
You need land to grow food on.
You need water.
You need oil.
The environment also is something we enjoy.
We go vacation in it.
So there's use value for national parks and you want, you know, and, and then another thing that environmental economists recognize is that there's something called existence value that people place.
For instance, I will never go to the ANWR National Preserve up in northern Alaska.
I will never go there.
That doesn't mean I do not put value on the fact that it exists and we're not going to open up those oil leases that would destroy that park.
So that's called sort of, so when you're trying to sort of evaluate environment and how much we should protect it, these are things that environmental economists take into account.
They should.
So roughly speaking, there's a consumption value to a protected or enhanced environment, as well as we're preserving it as a capital asset and not drawing it down so fast that we have nothing left later.
So all of these things have to be taken into account and you have to identify, well, who would be the best people to task with estimating what these somewhat unknowable benefits are going to be in the future?
And who are we going to task with estimating the cost of protecting the environment or the cost of producing the education in the future?
And so what we have done is we've sort of carefully gone through and tried to identify what consumer federations or producer federations would be best.
You have to look at two things. Who actually would have better knowledge about what these effects are going to be and who might have a tendency, who might have an incentive to either over or underestimate a particular effect.
So we've tried to do is carefully take those things into account and make tentative proposals about who would you put in charge of making these estimates?
And then the planning agency, you can have an environmental planning agency, an educational planning agency, you can just have some, you can have an investment planning agency sort of take those estimates and calculate what the efficient plan would be in each case.
Now we're not done. First thing we have to do is test that against the generational equity constraint.
Because that plan might violate the generational equity constraint, in which case it's got to be revised and modified.
Now you've done that. It either didn't violate or it's revised and modified.
What do you then have to do? Well, at that point, we think there needs to be a debate.
There needs to be a vote. Is that debate and vote something that's done through the national legislature and the political system?
So what we're talking about is approving a long run environmental plan, approving an education plan, approving an investment plan.
How do you do that at this point? It could be through legislature discussion debate.
It could be put to a referendum. So we're agnostic of all that. I mean, that's what we're saying. Of course, at that point, it should be handled democratic.
The place where we think we've done something clever and discovered something that I don't know if other people have discovered is this.
We know that whatever plan has been drawn up, check with the generational equity constraint, discuss, debated, voted on.
It will it will be mistaken. There will be mistakes because we will have estimated some things wrong.
So it's really important to figure out, is there some way to identify when a mistake has been made and is there something you can do about it before it's too late?
And what we discovered is that when you look at the results we get from annual plans, so suppose we do an investment plan for 10 years, it's all approved.
It's implemented. We also have to have an annual plan for the first year during that investment plan.
Now, that annual plan, the investment plan will already tell us how many machines of different kinds we have to produce during that year.
The investment plan has decided how much investment goods have to be produced during the first year.
So that's a given when we do the annual planning. But at the end of that first year, there is information that will tell us whether or not it actually turned out that we produced the right number of machines.
That the results of the annual plan will tell us that there was something wrong with the 10-year investment plan.
Now, the important thing, I mean, the important thing is there's still nine years that we can correct for. You can't correct for the first year.
It took you a year to discover that something you estimated in the investment plan was actually wrong.
The results of the first year showed you it was wrong. That's the clever thing we figured out.
You can't go back and undo the first year. So you already invested a little bit wrong in that first year.
You can't do anything about that. But you've got nine years left.
And there's no reason you can't revise the investment plan after the first year in light of what you just discovered.
And that mitigates the sort of welfare losses for the next nine years.
And you can do that every year. And of course, it's even more important to do that for your environmental plans.
And more important, the longer the planning period, the more important it is, the longer the planning period, the more mistakes the plan will make.
The longer the planning period, the harder it is to estimate what those future effects are going to be.
Therefore, the longer the planning period, the more valuable it is to be able to identify the errors and then revise that long term plan in order to sort of mitigate the damages.
And that's essentially the logic of what we presented for the first time here in part five of the Democratic Planning Book.
And I would just say it's unvetted. It's not unvetted in the sense that it hasn't been successfully passed by peer review and published in economic journals.
Because the logic is the same whether it's investment planning, education planning or environmental planning.
And so it went through the proposal for the investment planning and this whole procedure for identifying errors and correcting errors that we submitted to an economic journal and it's been accepted.
I don't think it's in print yet, but at least it went through sort of a pretty careful review process from some reviewers who were very skeptical that we had managed to accomplish what we were claiming.
Yeah, I mean, all of the things that you just described within your last answer, what all of this kind of emits as a feeling maybe or what I see coming back into the model of Perricon is allowing more of a political process on a macro level within the model.
And this is something I highly appreciate because when you were talking about the anarchist skepticism towards the IFB, the Iteration Facilitation Board, I kind of share this anarchist skepticism towards central plant economies for sure because I'm not a big fan of central plant economies.
Definitely, but what I, on the other hand, like myths within the IFB are, and maybe this came through through my questions, are like political processes that might like assist the parametric ones.
And within this long term planning, I see this political debate, this need for radical deliberation as a process coming back into the model.
And I highly appreciate it, I have to say, because if I understand you correctly, there might be these people who are tasked with like finding out how to do things in the most efficient and ideal way.
But at the end, they will have to produce some form of plan, ideally plans, a landscape of different plans that will then be decided upon through a political process, as I understand it.
And this is something I think is the actually only way to go, because you cannot go about these questions, education, environment, long term planning, long term investment, just via some form of like utility function, so to speak.
No, I think, you know, this is very interesting. And what's curious is, we almost have opposite reactions.
So you were looking at the annual planning and saying, there's no real planning here.
And there's certainly no sort of political process that's guiding the planning, it seems just nobody is having to think about all of these things.
There's this thinking in terms of my own self activity proposal, and a very quick yes or no approving of others based on a very obvious criteria.
Where is the discussion, the debate, because there are complicated things about economics, where is the discussion, the debate, it's not there.
And then you're looking at our proposals about investment and long term development planning and saying, well, this is more pleasing to me.
It's the kind of thing that I've, and I have the opposite reaction, because, and actually there's various places in part five of the book, where I point out what I believe are some unfortunate consequences.
And the unfortunate consequences are, when you look at who we propose would be involved in the generation of the plan, it's consumer federations, it's industry federations of workers councils.
Those are delegates.
That's already one whole huge level removed from an actual worker, an actual consumer.
So what I like about the annual planning is, it's the actual workers and actual consumers who are doing it.
And what I find, what I find worrisome about the more long term planning stuff is that it's already one level removed from the ordinary citizen.
Now we can make sure that the people involved are represented, they're representing, and the procedures for having them elected to be the representatives are very democratic.
But I worry about it as, for the ordinary person, does it just sort of, I don't know, there was a whole bunch of long term plans that were drawn up.
I don't remember ever being involved in any of that.
So I almost see it as a necessary evil, that the objective conditions basically leave us no other choice.
When we're coming up with sensible procedures that are democratic, I want them to be efficient, I want them to be fair, I want them to be democratic.
I can do all that, but I can't make them as participatory as in your own workers council, you propose what you want to make and how you want to make it and nobody can revise it except for you.
I can't do that. And that upsets me.
That's very interesting. I mean, there you go. I'd say there you go.
There you go. There are questions that cannot be addressed within what is called in Paragon at some point, a self-sovereign workers council, if I'm correct.
And so there is not, I would answer maybe in this direction, whether it is on an individual level as a human being or on the level of the workers council, there's always these interdependencies that you yourself always talk about and point towards.
And this necessarily creates levels of engagement that are beyond this level of autonomy, the fiction of autonomy on this level that you yourself are able to influence in the manner that you would like it to be in the form of direct participation.
There's one other thing that I think is rather curious or interesting about the investment in the long-term development planning.
There's a world in which we have to argue about what kind of economy we like.
And then there's a much bigger world that has been having an argument over whether or not capitalism, actual real world economies, should be more or less planned than they are.
And that's a debate that's gone on since the beginning of capitalism.
And what we have just lived through the past 40 years was a huge swing away from planning toward just let the market rip.
And of course, different countries have always been in different places on that spectrum.
But globally, the spectrum has moved dramatically away from planning.
I think that that has proven to be such a palpable sort of mistake that we will see revived interest in planning amongst people who don't give a shit about socialism.
And I actually think some of the things that we have now recommended about how a desirable economy would tackle these issues are likely to become of interest to others who are not interested in a truly desirable economy or socialism of any kind.
You know, before our debates about market socialism versus Cockshop and Cottrell's Scottish model of planning or the Albert Hanell participatory economy annual planning, because I do think that there are two contributions.
So intellectual contributions to this sort of part five of the book.
And one is that the rest of the world is not going to be interested in the generational equity constraint.
But the rest of the world is going to be very interested in how the results of what just happened this year.
They identify where you made mistakes in your long term plan, and there's plenty of time to make corrections.
So that contribution is something that anybody doing long term planning of any kind, no matter what kind of economy they're interested in, should actually be very interested in.
The other thing is, I sense amongst the younger generation, there's a real sense amongst the younger generation that they want economic decision making to be more democratic and participatory.
Their nightmare is going to work for a global capitalist corporation or only the where they're just clogs in the wheel until they join management.
So I think that since what we have proposed is how can you do long run planning and make it as participatory as possible and make it democratic also in the end, that that will be an attractive idea to progressive politically minded people.
And it's in some sense separable from all the rest of the sort of model of a participatory economy.
So I think that there's sort of an opportunity for us to make some headway in some to make some headway in some political circles that are much broader than our usual ones.
And all progress will only come, you know, when you have maximized your allies, even if they're temporary.
So I think that's also another area in which when we do have sort of a fully vetting of all this about the proposals about doing long term.
The other thing is, there's nothing in these proposals about doing long term strategic, you know, strategic international long term planning, education planning, environmental planning, investment planning, that if I were David Schweikert and I had proposed the model of
market socialism.
That still isn't an answer about how do you go about doing planning.
I mean, that's, that's an alternative answer to don't do the annual planning, the participatory annual planning, don't do the central planning and a comprehensive central planning.
Leave all that to the markets and make sure that there's no capitalist owners of the workplaces have those be workers councils.
But the essence of his proposal simply at that point is and let markets decide all that.
And he really doesn't have any sensible proposal, the market socialists don't have sensible proposals about, they don't really they really don't make proposals, just like we, you know, for all these years didn't really make any concrete proposals about procedures for coming up with
investment and development plans and checking them for inevitable errors and then who gets to vote on them finally and how is it debated and decided in the end.
All of our competitors in the debate about alternatives to capitalism have really said very little about that and there's no reason that any one of them couldn't go ahead and use this as their answer to that question.
So there will be new alliances.
Don't expect David Schweiker to agree with that, by the way.
No, but I mean, I like the idea that you that you say okay, we have this building block now that addresses a whole bunch of questions concerning the question of planning as such, that might be attractive for a whole bunch of different people that that we were that are not our core
clientele, so to speak. And so this might be something that that further fuels this renaissance of planning, so to speak.
So this is a quite a nice idea.
I think that's the payoff for us. The payoff for us is if for 40 years neoliberalism gave planning a bad economic planning a bad reputation demeaned and convinced a large body of the global populace that you know it was just an inefficient mistake.
Well, the fact that Chinese capitalism is out competing US capitalism hands over fist is because they have a more planned version of capitalism.
So I think there's all sorts of reasons and there's no way you can solve climate change without a lot more planning.
So, I look forward to I can see reasonable reasons to expect that the reputation of planning is going to be rescued from the rubbing it took during the 40 year neoliberal period.
And that in and of itself is going to make it easier for us to talk about all of the stuff we want to talk about.
So I think that's a plus for us. Not only do we have some ideas they could make use of. I think that anything that makes people more have a more friendly attitude toward the idea of economic planning is just got to help us going forward.
I'm very much interested in the question of real life paragon examples and specifically whether or not there are examples of experiments that you know of that really try to tackle the question of scale.
So maybe even that try to make use of modern information and communication technologies in order to tackle this question of scale.
Do you know of any such experiments that try to envision an idea, not only envision an idea of paragon, but to also practice it?
Good question. And at some point we're going to connect this up to the issue of transition strategy.
So let me sow a seed for that connection that will come. Very broadly speaking, I think transition strategy comes down to two rather different kinds of things.
Two rather different kinds of organizing activities. One of which I call building and strengthening progressive social movements, the labor movement, the women's movement, the anti-racist movement, the anti-corporate movement.
These are all progressive movements where there are clearly problems in capitalism, in the existing society that clearly need to be addressed.
Large numbers of people are adversely affected by the problems that these different movements address.
So this is the opportunity for us to reach out to the broadest number of people and engage with them in activities that can win substantial victories even without economic system change.
And then the question becomes how do you participate in those movements in ways that not only win reforms, but also lead people to want even greater reforms and come to the conclusion that that can't happen at some point unless you have fundamental system change.
The other activity, the other major kind of organizing activity that I think is going to be necessary in many places for a successful transition is what I call building and creating real life experiences and equitable cooperation.
And that's actually organizing activities where we're starting to put into place what we are saying we want the entire economy and society to be able to do.
Now historically, probably the oldest example is this, is workers-owned cooperatives.
And there's a tendency amongst leftists to basically see our entire history as being the labor movement and unions.
And yet you could argue, particularly right now, the labor movement and unions in the United States are probably weaker than they have been.
You'd have to go back to the 1870s to find a period where the labor movement in the United States is as weak as it is presently.
So it's rather interesting that, on the other hand, the movement for workers cooperatives in the United States is not in such heavy decline as the labor movement is.
So that's one area. And I would say that workers cooperatives, now you want an example of workers cooperatives that's, and in terms of scale, some of them are rather large.
I mean, take a look at northern Italy.
I think a third of the economic activity in northern Italy is activity that is this whole system of sort of workers cooperatives and cooperatives that operates in northern Italy.
Or you look at Mondragon, you know, in the Basque region of Spain.
So some of these are not little tiny experiments.
Another example I would give is the whole idea of participatory budgeting.
And it's very interesting.
This idea came up in two places in the world, and I know from personal experience that neither one of them was aware of what was going on in the other place.
So this idea that we want to do participatory budgeting, what does that mean?
Well, city budgets are basically decided by sort of the city government bureaucracy.
And in Porto Alegre, Brazil, the Workers' Party, the Lula Workers' Party, came up with the idea that, you know, we want some percentage of the tax revenues of the city to be set aside.
And how they are used should be decided by different neighborhoods in the city are going to have assemblies, and they're going to go through a process of discussing how it is they'd like to have that money spent.
They're part of the money. They're going to decide how it's spent through some sort of neighborhood assemblies.
And that was what they called a participatory budgeting.
And at the same time, one of the most leftist states in India, which is Kerala, India, that the, in Kerala, India, there was a period, I mean, actually the Communist Party has been the ruling party in Kerala, India, two or three different times over the past 50 years.
And they had a more or less traditional sort of Marxist and Communist program when they governed.
And then in the early 2000s, a new generation of leaders in that party in Kerala, India, said, you know, when we govern, we basically have been trying to implement serve the people programs.
But that's not really what we're all about.
We also want to empower people to make decisions about how they best serve themselves.
And so they also pioneered a participatory budgeting process, and they ran on that platform and they were elected on that platform.
And for about a period of 10 years before they were voted out of power, they implemented this very elaborate participatory budgeting process where they literally had 20% of the population attending assemblies and meetings.
Making decisions about how they wanted to see the tax revenues spent on what kinds of projects and what kinds of programs.
Well, obviously, participatory budgeting, you know, is, it's two things.
It's an expression to the fact that this is something people want.
It's an expression of the fact that it also affords us real life experience about what are the pros and cons of trying to organize it in one kind of way or another kind of way.
Participatory economic decision making about how it is we want things done.
And it also, to the degree that it is successful, and in both these places, it was remarkably successful.
I mean, it wasn't lack of success in these programs that led to the electoral defeat of the Workers' Party in Brazil or the Communist Party in Kerala.
These programs were popular. Their electoral defeat was due to other causes.
It also just, it builds people's confidence that these kinds of things work and that they aren't just pie in the sky and somehow all these important economic decisions are best left to somebody else.
So those are some examples of big things.
Now, I mentioned that there were a couple of places, very small types of operations that really tried to implement the entire proposal, including effort and sacrifice rating and balancing jobs for empowerment and all of that.
And there were a series of small collectives that were organized jointly. It was called the A-Zone.
And they had a series of buildings in the city of Winnipeg in Canada.
And, I mean, the businesses, there was a bicycle repair business, there was a recording studio record business, there was a restaurant, there was the Mondragon Cafe restaurant.
They did a bicycle delivery program. I couldn't believe they delivered bicycles through the winter in Winnipeg when the snow was six feet high.
Obviously, this is a seasonal business. No? What do you mean seasonal? We deliver all year round.
In any case, so these people had read about participatory economics and said, we're going to do it.
We're going to at least do the part that has to do with how would a workers council run, you know, in these ways. And they did it for about 15 to 20 years.
And there's a really rich experience there of what sort of problems did they run into, what kinds of conflicts came up, what worked, what didn't work.
And I can tell you that one of the things that was most problematic was the effort rating.
And whether or not people were comfortable with it, whether they weren't comfortable with it, how to go about it, what to do about it.
And that's a rich experience to learn from.
The other place that very self-consciously applied, you know, tried to apply all these was the South End Press, which was a left press in Boston for they did finally go out of business about four or five years ago now.
But it was a very successful left press, you know, in the United States that operated for about 30 years.
And it was always organized along the, according to the principles of participatory economy in terms of balancing jobs, remuneration, all of that.
And if you take a look at other left presses, they're basically a pretty standard business model.
Usually there is some sort of major donor who has sort of poured a lot of money into it, but then it runs more or less, you know, the same way that other publishers, you know, book publishers do.
And there was a big question about, well, is South End Press going to be, is the standard business model for a publisher going to prove to be more competitively successful in the book publishing industry than South End Press is?
Which is insisting on apply, you know, running itself in a very, very different way.
And you could say, well, South End Press no longer exists, but it wasn't because it wasn't successful at publishing book for all those years.
It was amongst the most successful of left publishing houses in the United States during the time of its operation, which provides some evidence that, no, these things aren't so in, these ideas and suggestions about how better to organize work processes.
They aren't so limiting to productivity that people applying those principles and working in that way cannot be perfectly successful in competition with businesses that are being run along standard or what you might call capitalist principles.
I have some macro and some micro questions, I guess.
Let's start with the micro ones, because you stated that taken from the real life experience, one of the most problematic aspects of Perikan that was causing the most trouble was the, this idea of effort ratings that one judges his or her coworker,
and then the remuneration would be coupled to this kind of judgment.
And when I was reading about Perikan, this was immediately something that I could not get along with because I immediately thought this will definitely lead to some sort of toxic environment.
So if you hear about these experiments and then people who actually try to implement these ideas and they give you the feedback that this is something that actually did not work out,
why do you then stick to this principle in your most recent work, for example?
Why don't you, because usually one would think that this would lead you to a point where you would have to revise the idea of effort ratings and maybe stick to a different kind of model of how remuneration could be addressed, as you did with housework and care work.
Okay, first of all, so let me just say sort of three things to situate the discussion.
Our actual proposal is that workers councils do whatever the hell they want in this regard.
So, I have no trouble taking that position, but I consider that to be a principal position.
And the second thing is, while we recommend that you would want to do something about this, we leave it up to you how to do it.
And I am sure that if there were a participatory economy with hundreds of thousands of different workplaces, that there would be a huge difference in how different workplaces went on, you know, decided to go about this, including when they decided to do anything along these lines at all.
And I don't think that's a bad thing.
Because here's an area where we're not sure how work, we're not really sure how things work out.
And in that context, whenever you find yourself in that situation, having a social experiment where you have a very wide variety of people trying things that are quite different from one another is sort of a sensible way to find out what works best and what doesn't.
The third thing I'd say is, I think there's a huge difference between leftists and normal people on this subject.
Most leftist reaction to, do I want somebody sitting in judgment about whether I'm working very hard?
Do I want to sit in judgment of my co-workers about whether they're working very hard?
Most leftists just don't like that.
I don't like it.
I would choose a workplace where we all were more or less on the honor system.
I mean, where would I want to work in a participatory economy?
I would look for a place that was on the honor system extreme of the spectrum, because that's what I would be most comfortable with.
Both from the point of view of whether somebody else is judging whether I've been working very hard and whether I want to really get myself in the, do I want to put myself in a position where I'm getting into fellow workers' faces about, you haven't been working very hard this last month.
But I don't think that, I think there's a huge difference between people who are already progressive and leftist on this subject in terms of their own personal attitudes and normal people.
I think amongst normal people, the whole idea that, well, if the people that I'm working with aren't working very hard, and I am, I got a problem with that.
And are you proposing an economic system where I would just become victim of a bunch of, you know, a bunch of gold-brickers and slaggers in my own workplace, and they're going to, you're telling me that they're going to get paid the same thing I am?
There's no remedy for that.
So that's where I come down on it.
I'm not surprised it's controversial.
I think the average sentiment amongst leftists and people who aren't leftists is actually rather remarkably different on the subject.
I also think that what we leftists want and are comfortable with might require a learning process.
It's not that what we want isn't better, but it might be that we need a history of people being responsible to their workmates.
We need a history of that.
I think the thing that's annoying or troubling is making invidious comparisons.
We don't want people making invidious comparisons about us, and we don't want to make invidious comparisons about other people.
Well, the way to avoid the necessity of invidious comparisons is a historical track record of people behaving responsibly.
Once people discover that people are behaving more and more responsibly because things are set up so that you're rewarded for behaving responsibly,
once people discover that that's the case, then I think that my expectation would be that the amount of time and energy that goes into effort rating
or sort of trying to measure whether somebody made a greater or lesser sacrifice than somebody else for purposes of compensation,
the amount of time and energy and people just paying attention to that.
There's a reason that economic justice is such an incredibly important touch point for everybody,
because we have all been victims of economic injustice and we've witnessed and experienced economic injustice.
So it's a hot issue.
People care a hell of a lot about it, and they should, and we should.
But will that be the case in a society where economic injustice has basically, I mean, you're never going to completely eliminate it.
But where economic injustice is no longer sort of a prime concern in people's lives,
well, then is it unreasonable to expect that people will just care less about it and therefore put less time and energy into whatever sort of systems
people would set up to go about measuring, you know, whether there's differences in sacrifices.
The other thing is the one other thing I'll say on this subject is I don't think there's any dishonor in putting in less effort.
I don't want to work at maximum effort intensity all the time.
Now, my wife is a very different personality.
She almost can't stop herself from doing it.
But I do recognize that on average she's putting in more effort when she goes to work than what I do.
And I'm perfectly happy to accept that my compensation would be somewhat less.
So the proposal is, I think we want to leave people with the personal choice of just how intensely, you know, how much sacrifice and how much effort do you want to sink into your work activity
as compared to working in working less hours.
That's easy or working in a more laid back way.
I think that's something that I'm happy to leave up the personal choice.
On the other hand, as somebody who would choose a more leisurely sort of pace of work, then I'm happy to accept somewhat less compensation for the fact for that.
That's my personal choice.
And I'm happy to accept somewhat less compensation and somebody who's going to work more intensively.
I'm perfectly happy and think they deserve to have somewhat more compensation.
Anyway, those are my thoughts on the subject.
And it's been amongst people's reactions to the sort of participatory economics proposal.
It's been one of the things where the reaction has been sort of most strong.
There's absolutely no doubt about that.
In the history of socialism, the subject that there's been an equal amount of controversy on is a little bit different, though.
In the history of socialism, basically, the debate has been does everybody get paid the same per hour of work would be one or if your work is more socially valuable than my work, do you deserve to get paid more?
That's been debated hot and heavily throughout the history of socialism.
And the spectrum on that has varied back and forth in every country that called itself socialist, you know, during the entire 20th century.
This is a little different. It's a different controversy.
It's a different place. It's a different issue that many people have a difference of opinion on.
And I have to say, when I read your book, I absolutely agree with your argument against both of these.
Against the measurement by labor time and against the measurement by quote unquote contribution.
But I have to add I'm also against remuneration according to effort and sacrifice because what you just did, you kind of picked a more or less uncontroversial situation
where you yourself agree with the assessment that you did not put as much effort into the work than somebody else than your wife.
But of course, the difficult thing to do would be to decide within situations where the person that thinks she or he is putting in a lot of effort,
the self experience of how much effort I put in is not identical to the judgment by one's peers.
And these are the toxic situations that would make it explosive.
That's right. If your peers judge you more harshly than your own self judgment is where the conflict comes.
And let me add on that. I think that will happen.
And sometimes when I write about it, it happened to me at my university where I worked for 37 years.
I was undervalued all the time and I got paid less than I should have been.
And I resented it. And it's very important that will happen.
I mean, one remedy for that is that you fight. I mean, you have to basically challenge the judgment.
And then the question is, well, what's the process?
But the ultimate remedy for that is don't stay where I mean, the only reason I stayed working.
I eventually left as soon as I could. I mean, I was there for 35 years, but that's because I have four children and I was raised.
I mean, and my wife had a job and it made no sense to leave.
And once you're a tenured professor, as much as they underpay you, it's still a great job compared to almost any other job.
But the remedy, I mean, the remedy for that is make it easy for people to leave.
If you're not being appreciated where you work, it's not so terrible if it's easy for you to go and find a place.
And if you're right, if it's easy for you to go find another place to work and if you're right, you'll find one that actually appreciates you more.
Which proved to be the case in my case when I finally was able to move to a different city.
I got I got treated much more fairly at the university out here in Portland than I was treated at American University for 34 years.
It's frustrating when you can't move, but if you can move and if you're right, then that's the remedy.
Basically, what you're saying is your fellow workers are discriminating against you and it's very bad.
I mean, it's a very bad feeling. I remember it.
And I'm not the kind of leftist that pretends these things won't happen even in a good society.
So the question reduces to when these unfortunate life experiences do happen, then have we got some sort of remedy or way of handling them?
That's the best that we could do, which means that ease of moving from one worker council to another worker council becomes a very important thing to achieve.
You want to make it very easy for people to move from one another worker council because there will be all sorts of reasons that people want to move.
And one of them will be I don't think I'm being treated fairly by my workmates.
It might not just be remuneration. I mean, there are all sorts of other ways in which your workmates might not be treating you fairly.
And it's always miserable to stay in contact with a whole bunch of people who aren't treating you fairly.
Yes. Well, I understand the remark to moving.
And I think it would take up too much time to go even deeper into the question of whether or not this is a good idea to implement.
And I very much appreciate the fact that Paracon is so flexible to allow different workers councils to handle this.
On this issue, it would be disingenuous to say we're flexible on a subject.
I mean, we've been famously denounced for not being flexible about markets.
And just because I thought sometimes it helps to draw the battle lines for the discussion,
I decided to go ahead and call myself a market abolitionist.
So there are some things that we're not flexible about, but yet this we are flexible about.
And actually, to be very honest with you, I think some of us who say we are advocates for a participatory economy,
some of us are more flexible about it and some of us are a little less flexible about it.
Well, I'm happy to hear that in general about this issue, you're flexible.
And I'm also happy just as a side note that you are not flexible on the question of markets.
So I do agree on that part as well.
Well, so I already stated the micro question, so to speak.
I have a macro question as well.
And this would be you just sketched on the one part, examples in terms of workers cooperatives.
It's very easy to imagine how this might work and how these might lead into situations of, let's say,
prefigurative politics that might be a place to learn all of the also social skills that you need
in order to live and work and everything else in a participatory economy.
So these experiments on a smaller scale are very easy to imagine.
You also sketched experiments in Kerala and in Porto Alegre in terms of participatory budgeting.
So now let's go even a step further.
How would we go about if we wanted to do experiments that are scalable, that are large in scale,
but are not restricted to, quote unquote, only the question of participatory budgeting,
but try to implement Perikon in its whole, in a larger context?
Are there any ideas of how experiments that would try to do this could go about?
There's two things that you might sort of think about in this regard.
The easiest one is some leftist movement comes to power in some country,
and they have no intentions of trying to run a centrally planned economy.
And they're not disciples of market socialism.
They're not enamored of markets.
Could a country go about setting up an economy run in some ways along the lines of a participatory economy?
Could they do annual participatory planning?
Could they do the kind of environmental planning and education planning and investment planning that we've outlined?
Could they try to do that?
There's no reason that a country, there's no reason that a movement coming to power in any country couldn't try this.
And situations have arisen where that was a possibility.
In Sri Lanka, there's what's primarily an ethnic conflict.
And about a third of the population has been in conflict with the majority population in government for decades and decades and decades.
And at some point in the early 1990s, it looked like that liberation movement had managed to liberate a third of the island.
And they were interested in, well, we now have to figure out how to run our economy.
And I talked with various, I mean, it just so happened that there were students at my university that were connected to that movement.
It could have happened. It didn't. But it could have happened.
And it would have provided a real life experiment of some people who were leftists trying to organize the economy in a very different way than any leftists have ever done in history.
And it would have given us some sort of evidence about what works and what doesn't work.
I was invited down to Cuba in 1990 to consult with them about their planning system.
Because there was dissatisfaction amongst Cuban economists and various people in the Cuban planning ministry and the Cuban Communist Party.
They weren't that happy about how their economy was run.
And they were interested in ideas about how they might make it.
Their basic complaint was, our economy is sort of just this slow, sluggish thing that doesn't motivate anybody to do anything.
And my response was, why are you surprised?
But you could change your planning system, you know, in a way that actually gave people a reason to care, to participate.
And one of the things that I've known for a long, long time in the case of Cuba is, very early in the revolution, they established these things called Committees for Defense of the Revolution.
These are neighborhood committees.
And I, in some ways, these neighborhood committees have basically, they've done some bad things.
They've basically become the eyes of the government on, you know, who's a little bit, who's a dissident.
On the other hand, these neighborhood committees also have a lot of power over, you know, distribution of goods and services.
And, you know, how it is that new housing is sort of built and who gets, you know, who it's assigned to and things like this.
So I realized that if you think about a participatory economy, well, there's always workplaces.
The thing that doesn't exist anywhere that we are saying is an important part of how we think the economy has to be run is our neighborhood consumption councils.
And what I realized was they actually have the neighborhood consumption councils in Cuba, and we can make them do good things and stop them from doing bad things.
But they've existed, they've been there for 40 years.
So, unfortunately, I mean, I consulted there, and this was in 1990, and it was right when the Soviet Union was collapsing.
And Cuba was entering through no fault of their own into what was called the special period where their GDP basically shrunk by half through no fault of their own.
And so I was supposed to go down there and consult with economists and various people in the planning ministry about some new, new innovative ideas.
And nobody had any time for anything other than how the hell are we going to survive this?
And they barely did. But that's a possibility.
When Chavez came to power in Venezuela, he invited a lot of people in from around the country to help him try and think through, well, how do we want to do our, I mean, what's our economic policy and program and what's our future economic vision like?
Because, I mean, I know from a fact from people who were sitting in the meetings that Chavez, who was very, very good close personal friends with Fidel Castro, and Chavez said to Castro, we don't really want to copy your economic model.
And I also know Fidel Castro said back to him, good, don't.
And so they were looking for something else. And I consulted twice for an institute that the Chavez government set up explicitly to bring in sort of people from outside the country to help them with various ideas about what was their economic policy, etc.
And one of the things they did, they created more workers co-ops faster in Venezuela than have ever been created any place as part of their transition to.
They made good use of the high oil price and basically financed a huge number of workers co-ops.
Now they were criticized because the failure rate was very high.
But I thought they were very sensible. They said, look, the failure rate is very high. On the other hand, the ones that didn't fail, there's a lot of them.
And we had the damn money. So yeah, if you're going to do something big, then there's going to be a higher failure rate because you're going to finance a bunch that really weren't that they were bad bets to survive.
So they did. They created a rather large, I mean, they created a cooperative sector of their economy, you know, and grew it faster than I think the cooperative sector of any economy has ever grown.
And they saw it simply as this is part of our, this is part of a transition society, you know.
And part of their strategy also was they did not want to nationalize.
Partly for political reasons, they thought that they would, that they would provoke the opposition and they hesitated to nationalize in order not to provoke.
And partly they didn't nationalize because they said, we don't want to nationalize anything until we know how we're going to run it.
And we're still trying to figure out how to run it. And that's part of the reason they had brought people like me and a bunch of other people from around the world with
bright ideas that we were all trying to sell about how you should try and organize your economy.
That's one way it can happen.
Now, another way it could happen is what if you had maybe a section of a fairly large city with a very large and active movement.
And they said, we just want to create a participatory economy in our section of the city.
And what gives me this idea that I was in Greece for a conference at the sort of the height of the Syriza sort of power.
And I was staying in a hotel and the conference was being held in a city that basically was in leftist hands.
There was a whole section of Athens that was in.
And people had asked me, well, why couldn't we just do a participatory economy, you know, in our part of the city?
And my original answer was, oh, I mean, no, the whole thing only works if it's the whole if it's a national economy.
And then I realized, well, wait a minute.
We actually have a proposal for how it is that a small participatory economy would interact with.
Countries through trade and everything that, you know, that have capitalist economies.
Why couldn't this section of Athens basically organize itself with workers councils and consumer councils and do all this wonderful thing?
Now, a lot of what a lot of what they need to buy and a lot of what they need to sell is with outsiders.
But that's no different than a small country.
Has to deal through trade or even international financial investment, you know, with other countries.
My original reaction was would like nothing better than it's a viable strategy to say here we believe that we're going to start it and then we'll get experience.
People will see that it works.
My original reaction is it just doesn't work that way.
That's, you know, that you have to somehow have a strategy where you're going to be, you know, you're the majority of the country wants to do it and reorganize the national economy that way.
I'm not now. I'm not so sure that now I'm not so sure that it has to be some country where a political movement comes to power that wants to try it.
I'm not sure that it couldn't be.
I mean, in Athens, there were probably 50,000 people who lived in that section of Athens.
I think it probably would be possible for 50,000 people, you know, in a city like Athens to say we want to actually run the economy in this part of the city this way.
And we even know how to interact in terms of trade with other parts of the city, other parts of Greece that we know aren't running this way.
And does it have to be a geographical unit?
So, I mean, there are cooperatives all over the world.
There are information and communication technologies that absolutely hold the potential to kind of mediate between those.
And so one might think another possibility could be to have some kind of parallel system that is not defined through a specific geography, a specific place where people would have to where everybody would have to agree that this is the way to go.
But that there could be, as I said, some kind of parallel system that defines itself through the people who already want to participate in such an experiment.
That's an interesting idea. In the Internet era, I think that that is a possibility that would never have occurred to me in the past.
But they can't, but not with a cryptocurrency, please.
OK, just don't go to the don't don't go to a cryptocurrency on me.
I get a rash as soon as somebody says cryptocurrency.
There's one way that you can connect up that I do believe has not been taken advantage of to the extent that it should be.
There is an international cooperative movement.
It's been around for hundreds of years now.
And the international cooperative movement, one of its principles is that co-ops should help other co-ops.
And the form in which that's taken has basically been, well, a well established, long established co-op that's basically on pretty firm financial ground.
Maybe it should, you know, it has an obligation.
It has a duty as sort of a member of the international cooperative movement to establish advice for people trying to start up a new co-op.
You know, we've got experience, we've got advice or even establish some sort of, you know, financial aid, you know, help give them startup money.
That's been around for a long time and it's good.
And I published an article in the Eastern Economic Journal, probably about 10 years ago, saying, you know, we could take that a further step.
And it's very similar to what you're talking about, because these co-ops are not even in the same country.
You know, who are members of this international association and who do engage in this solidaristic type of behavior.
Why don't they when trading between them?
But what they do is they all trade to the extent that they trade amongst themselves.
They trade through markets.
And we know that's actually not a good way to do it.
So why couldn't they agree to trade amongst themselves in a way that is essentially.
Giving the majority of the efficiency gained from the trade to the weaker of the co-ops.
Now, in order to do that, you have to have some way of sort of empirically establishing what are the weaker of the co-ops.
But I wrote an article in the Eastern Economic Journal saying, you know, I think that the international cooperative movement could take a further step in a direction that they've always shown themselves inclined to want to go.
And this would actually be materially far more advantageous to the new co-ops and the weaker co-ops.
So just from the point of view of, are you going to grow your movement more successfully?
I think I can recommend it on those grounds.
And does it take you in the direction of.
That is the problem.
Most people who work in the co-ops don't see anything wrong with markets.
So it's a hard sell because what I want to sell them is you never really like market exchange.
You always wanted to do.
You always would have rather have done it another way, but you never had the opportunity.
But amongst yourselves, amongst yourselves, you can create the opportunity.
But that would require you to have already come to the conclusion that part of the problem is markets.
And part of what prevents us from achieving our cooperative goal is that we unfortunately have to operate in the markets.
Because what I was proposing is I can pose a way for you to get out at least amongst your interrelations.
I can I can free you from the sort of market exchange process that is always problematic for you.
If you don't think it's problematic, then the idea isn't that interesting.
But I think it's very in some ways, it's similar to what you were talking about, which is.
Like minded people don't have to be geographically, you know, contiguous necessarily in order to to engage in some sort of
collaborative activity that starts to look like participatory economic practices.
Oh, and I wrote it at the time that I was consulting in Venezuela because they were creating all these co-ops.
And so one of the things I wanted to talk to them, I did talk to them about, I said, look, you're doing a great job of creating the co-ops.
Good thing you got all that high oil price right now.
Don't worry about the failure rate.
But if the ones that aren't failing, look, here's a next step that and there I had an audience that at least for a period of time was not the typical.
I mean, the international cooperative movement basically sided with the United States and denounced the Chavez government.
They took the Western pro-U.S. attitude on Venezuela.
And it was sort of embarrassing because the Venezuelans reached out to that movement, invited them to come in Venezuela and help them think about how to establish a bunch of co-ops.
And the leaders of the international cooperative movement were busy agreeing with US State Department evaluation of this whole social experiment in Venezuela.
But I was there at the same time.
And that's when I said, look, I now remember why I wrote the whole damn article and published it in the Eastern Economic Journal was because I was actually thinking the Venezuelans,
unlike a lot of people in the cooperative movement who find no problem with markets, they do have a problem with markets.
The Venezuelan government and movement, the Bolivarian revolutionaries.
And yet they're very busy setting up all these co-ops.
So they are an ideal audience to talk with.
Is there a way that you can start to establish relations amongst these workers co-ops that is a non-market exchange process amongst them?
And since we are already touching upon the subject of digital mediation, information and communication technologies and how they might inform such experiments,
I also did an episode of Future Histories with Daniel E. Saros, who wrote a book that you at least commented on in your last book yourself and called it Amazon Socialism.
So he does propose a so-called general catalog in which he proposes that everybody, every workers council should post the use values that it produces.
And then everybody would also have a so-called needs profile in which one could place one's needs in a certain order in order to communicate how important these needs are for myself
and thereby also informing the production process of the workers councils.
What do you think about his proposal and where would you see connections to Perricon?
I mean, he states pretty clearly that his proposal is very much informed by Perricon.
So there are like considerable overlaps, but what are the strengths of his proposal from your point of view and what are the weaknesses?
Well, first of all, there's an appendix to democratic economic planning.
And in the appendix, I present and then evaluate from my perspective, the strengths and weaknesses of other people's proposals about how to go about
socialist planning or democratic, socialist economic planning.
And so one of the, I think I do Cotshot and Cottrell.
David Labrum's proposal.
Dan Saros' proposal.
Pat Devine and Frick with Adam's proposal.
And then I also review, I call them the sort of autonomous community, the autonomous community sort of approach.
Because most people associate that with Schumacher.
So I actually, and I don't want to try and recreate that sort of, because part of the problem with Dan's proposal is it's not his fault.
It's very complicated.
And it really, it takes a lot of work to figure out exactly what he's proposing and how it works.
I mean, I had to communicate with him back and forth for a year and a half, just asking him questions about, am I understanding this right?
And so it took me a long time to figure out exactly how his proposal works.
But I think I did, and I got him to confirm that, because I don't want to evaluate something where the person who, because I've had this happen to me all the time.
Somebody is saying they're criticizing participatory economics, but they're criticizing something I didn't propose.
So I wanted to be careful that at least I understood what he was proposing before I said, well, this is what I think is, here's where I think this is good.
This is what I think is good about it.
And this is what I find problematic.
First, let me say that I think everybody should read it.
I mean, he has gone farther in the direction of saying, new information technologies have created a new technological situation in which we can now think about what is possible and not possible.
So I think he is the part that I find most, most helpful and most insightful is the degree to which he is telling all of us, wake up and rethink everything that you thought could be done or couldn't be done.
And ask yourself, were you thinking about that in the context of a pre-information technology revolution?
Because guess what?
We've had one.
So I think that's the strength, that he is the, he's the first one who's come along among socialist planner type thinkers to say, we need to take advantage of new information technology.
In some ways it's very similar to what Kopp, Schott and Cottrell said in terms of, well, you know, central planning really should take advantage of the new computational powers that came into being after World War II.
And so those are, it's important in that way.
I don't think it works as well as participatory planning.
One of the things that I'm constantly having to try and convince people who worry about participatory planning that it wouldn't be so burdensome for consumers to sit down.
And what I say is take the same number of hours it takes you to fill out your federal and state tax returns to at least put in some sort of, you know, rough proposal about what you want your consumption activity to look like in the next year.
He puts a much higher burden, you know, on people in terms of what information they have to convey.
So I think in that area, just in terms of practicality, and whether this is the kind of thing you could expect people to reasonably do, that he's demanding much more in that regard.
So if there's a problem with what I'm demanding in that regard in terms of whether people would be able to do it or happy to do it or unhappy doing it.
I think there's a much bigger problem from a practical point of view, you know, with his proposal in that regard.
The other part of the critique I have is it's more or less technical. I'm proud of the fact that our proposal will reach a feasible plan.
I'm pretty sure his won't. I mean, not a feasible plan, but an optimal or an efficient plan.
Economists use the word optimal. When they say optimal, they just mean efficient.
So I'm proud of the fact that I know that our proposal, that our planning process would be an efficient plan, and I'm pretty sure his wouldn't.
But that's kind of a technical issue.
Another place we're on the same grounds is his reaction to market socialists is, well, you're proposing market socialism because you claim it's impossible to do the planning.
I mean, you can't really do the detailed planning, but I'm showing you can. And so on that, we're really on the same wavelength.
We're both saying you can do planning and you can do planning in a participatory way.
Planning that bears no resemblance to the kind of central planning that was done in the Soviet type economies in the 20th century.
It's not, Ove was wrong when he said either markets or there's sort of central allocation, central planning.
There is no alternative. So I think Dan has proved that he was wrong because his proposal is sort of proof positive.
At least in theory, we could do this. And our proposal, I think, is also proof wrong because a different proposal says you can do it.
You can do something. You can coordinate a modern economy, you know, without either markets and without central planning.
So in that regard, I also think of it as an important contribution to people's thinking about all these things.
I will restrain myself not to get into the technical questions of your criticism because I'm actually also interested in those.
But I think these would really very much go too deep for the general audience. And so let's move on.
And I mean, I already said it, I'm very much appreciative of how Paragon is flexible, as you rightly pointed out, in certain regards,
specifically those which I had my troubles getting along with, as I already stated.
You know, I can make this, you know what? I'll make it very easy. I'm getting to be in a somewhat joking mood at the moment.
But, you know, I can promise you we will find a workers council whose system of evaluation you are comfortable with.
I can promise you that there will be many such councils that will handle that situation the way that you are comfortable with.
Oh, I'm sure. I'm sure.
You know what? Let me make one further comment on this.
I think there's a similarity here. This analogy might sort of ring with people.
In any family, there are sort of disagreements and controversies, differences of opinion, and some families handle this by
We're not going to talk about it, because if we talk about it and we argue about it, we're just going to end up feeling worse.
So it's sort of the sweep it under the rug approach, you know, to family problems.
And then there are other families that basically take a very different tact.
They say, you know what? Sweeping it under the rug just makes it worse. It just festers.
It's better to just get it out there. And, you know, and I think in some sense, that's what we're talking about.
To what extent is it going to be helpful to sort of just live and let live?
And to what extent is it actually going to be more healthy?
Not to let resentment, so I don't think you're working as hard as I am, but you're getting paid as much.
Not to let resentments fester. To what extent is it going to just work out better?
If everybody agreed, I mean, if there were never any differences between self-evaluations and others evaluations, there would be no problem.
But it's important to realize in the real world that will not happen. In the real world, there will be disagreements.
And then it's a question of what's the best way to handle it.
And one way to handle it, I think, comes down to glossing over and just sort of ignoring.
And the other way of handling is, no, we're going to get up in each other's faces and have it out and then we'll all feel better afterwards.
Of course, the concern is maybe we won't feel better afterwards.
Maybe we'll actually really, you know, feel even worse about each other afterwards.
But I think that's I think essentially this is what we're sort of.
I guess I think this is what the discussion comes down to. I just wanted to throw that out there.
Well, I mean, this is kind of connected to the question that I wanted to pose, actually, because the way that you describe it already establishes a certain image of how people are and that they would, as you said before, at some point,
like you believe that the most of the people would react in ways in which they would get kind of angry if they had the feeling as if people who worked less than themselves would be paid the same.
And that you, as you just stated right now, think that it's better to address this resentment instead of glossing over it.
But this already operates on a level of assumptions that I maybe would not share.
Throughout reading Paracon and about the model, I had the feeling as if all of the aspects that I'm having trouble getting along with are in some way, shape or form connected to, I guess, some assumptions that that Paracon might share with,
I'd say, neoclassical economics and I would, or microeconomics to be specific.
So I would be interested in what is this connection and how do these assumptions inform Paracon?
Because, as I said, I had the feeling as if there was some type of, I would say, methodological individualism at play within how the model itself is structured.
And not only in terms of how you frame questions of efficiency or equity or fairness and stuff like that, but also on the level of how it is built.
So you build it kind of from the ground up, I would say, and the ground is some specific image of humans, so to speak.
And at some point in the book, I'm not sure, I guess, in the book or somewhere else, you quite clearly say that this nucleus, this image of how humans are being modeled on the ground of Paracon is actually the idea of homoeconomicus.
And that this is something that informs how this model is being built.
And I really had the strong sense that the elements with which I had a hard time agreeing and the fact that this type of modeling is somewhat close to how Paracon is being built, that this overlay is very informative.
I would be interested in this connection.
What is the connection between Paracon and neoclassical economics?
And why do you use some of these ideas and types of modeling?
Okay, I'm going to say a couple of things that sort of get at this.
Most people interpret when neoclassical economists model individual behavior as utility maximizing, most people interpret this as and most neoclassical economists themselves think of this as the only reasonable approximation we can make in theory to how people will behave.
That people have priorities and preferences and what they try to do is maximize their satisfaction, their enjoyment, given their preferences and given the opportunities available to them.
So most mainstream economists defend the use of the models of utility maximization as our best approach theoretically to predicting human behavior.
Now, if you then go and challenge a neoclassical economist and say, do you really think that that's a good predictor of people's behavior?
What the smart ones will say is, no.
Sometimes people don't behave that way.
They don't behave in their own self-interest, but that's the best we can do.
If we're trying to explain behavior and we start with the assumption that the behavior is irrational, well then we're not going to be able to explain it.
Now that's what a mainstream economist, I'm giving you the mainstream economist mindset.
Here's how my mindset differs from that.
First of all, I completely agree.
Sometimes people behave in their own self-interest and sometimes they don't.
I'm not interested in predicting how people will behave.
I'm interested in evaluating economic institutions.
So whether or not we can predict people, how good a job we can do in predicting how people behave by assuming that they will act in their rational self-interest given their preferences.
I'm not interested in that.
The answer might be we'll do a pretty good job of predicting behavior or it might be we'll do a pretty bad job of predicting behavior.
Certainly for some people we'll do a better job of predicting their behavior and for other people we'll do a terrible job of predicting their behavior if we do that.
But my job is not to predict people's behavior.
My job is to evaluate economic institutions.
And what economic institutions is, they promote some kinds of behavior and they discourage other kinds of behavior.
So if I'm going to evaluate an economic institution from the perspective of what kind of behavior does it promote, what kind of behavior does it discourage?
The only way I know how to answer that is what kind of behavior does the economic institution make rational for people to engage in?
So that's why I assume that people will behave rationally.
Not because I think they'll behave rationally.
But because the way that any social institution encourages some kinds of behavior and discourages other kinds of behavior is it encourages the behavior that it would be individually rational for people to engage in.
And it discourages or penalizes the behavior that would be irrational for people to engage in.
Now let me say one other thing.
So my goal is to evaluate the predictable effects of economic institutions.
Does it promote people, does it encourage people to behave in solidarity with one another?
Or does it discourage people from behaving in solidarity with one another?
I mean in the case of public goods, does it provide incentives for people to consume too little, choose to consume what we can demonstrably demonstrate is too little public goods?
So markets basically promote behavior because it's individually rational for everybody to demand too few public goods.
And therefore we will get an inefficient amount of public goods in market economies unless we have some other procedure for deciding how much there's going to be.
I'll give an example from centrally planning.
I think that the institution of central planning discourages people from trying to seek self-managed work opportunities.
It basically penalizes you if you try and seek that and it rewards you for not deciding you don't care.
So those are the reasons that I use what I constantly get criticizing for decades now.
I am criticized by many of my leftist colleagues as Robin you're always engaging in individualistic methodologies that are neoclassical.
I'm saying there's a certain part of what they do that's useful for us.
They misplay it.
They use it to answer a question that's actually rather boring, which is how much will people behave in their own self-interest and how much will they actually not?
And I already know the answer to that question.
The answer is sometimes they will, sometimes they won't, some people more, some people less.
There's nothing less that's interesting about that.
But if you want to know what kind of behavior an institution is going to promote, the only way to answer that is what kind of behavior would it make it rational for people to engage in and what kind of behavior would it make it irrational for people to behave in?
And I'm interested in judging institutions, not judging people in terms of how they behave or don't behave.
So now there's one other thing I'll add, and that is mainstream economists tell us we should just take we should just take people's preferences as given.
And this goes back to Jeremy Bentham, and it's sort of ours is not to reason why somebody likes something.
The job of an economist is to sort of you like what you like, you don't like what you don't like.
I do not stand in judgment of you.
I'm just supposed to be telling you whether we can give you whatever it is you want.
Are we doing a good job of helping you get it?
And neoclassical economists have taken that lesson.
I would say, you know, it's almost the bedrock that they stand on.
It's their Bible.
And there is something good to that Bible.
For instance, if the alternative is that Joseph Stalin is going to decide what the Russian people want, well, then I'd much rather go with Jeremy Bentham on that,
which is the Russian people want whatever they want.
Do not sit in judgment on that.
Do not say I, the revolutionary philosopher king, know better what people want than they know themselves.
So in that regard, you know, I think the tendency of the economics profession, you know, to abandon the whole notion
that there's somebody else who knows better what people should, what there's somebody else who knows better than people themselves
what it is that they should have and they should want and what will make them happy.
We really need to abandon that.
That should go into the dustbin of history.
However, isn't it obvious that people's preferences change over time?
And do you really think that people's preferences change over time randomly?
Here's what I think happens.
At any point in time, people have certain preferences and they'll act on them.
They'll act on them by choosing to work here and not there.
They'll act on them by choosing to buy this and not that.
Well, once they make those choices, today's preferences lead me to make choices.
When I make those choices, I consume certain things and I do certain work and I don't do other work.
Well, I have a model of human development that says you sort of start at birth, you have a genetic endowment,
and then in large part what you become through life is dependent on what activities you've engaged in.
So I'm going to engage in a whole bunch of activities over a 20-year time period.
Isn't it predictable that whatever activities I engage in are going to have some effect on what preferences I come to have at the end of the 20 years?
So here's the way I would put it.
When we make choices today, we satisfy our preferences more or less,
but we also, in some degree, sometimes we are transforming what I call our human characteristics.
We develop human characteristics over time.
And those human characteristics have an effect on our preferences.
So this is what I call a model of endogenous preferences or preference formation.
It says at any point in time, we have preferences based on whatever our human characteristics are.
We make our choices.
Two effects of the choices.
Given our characteristics, our choices more or less satisfied our preferences today.
But when we engage in the activity of those choices we've made,
we modify over time what our characteristics happen to be.
And when we have different characteristics two or three years down the road,
then we'll probably have some different preferences based on those different characteristics.
So one way I approach an economic institution is not only what behavior it makes rational for people to engage in,
when they engage in that behavior, will it have a predictable effect on what kinds of human characteristics they develop
and therefore what sort of preferences they'll have in the future.
So let me go back to the question of central planning and worker apathy.
So you put me in a centrally planned economy.
I very quickly discover that having any sort of preference over what we're going to produce, how we're going to do it, is totally pointless.
The institution discourages that.
There's no reward for that.
So I go ahead and I develop preferences that are rational in that context.
I develop characteristics where I'm pretty apathetic about work.
It was rational to do that.
But it's part of understanding what the problem with central planning is that that'll be the predictable effect.
So those are the ways in which I use what is highly criticized on the left as methodological individualism.
I don't use it as a predictor of actual human behavior.
Instead, I use it as a way to evaluate institutions.
And I also think that it's important for us to ask the question.
These institutions create certain biases in terms of how expensive certain things are going to be and how easy certain things are going to be to get.
And those biases have a predictable effect on what sort of characteristics of people are going to develop over time.
And I think that's even the most fundamental thing we want to ask ourselves about economic institutions.
Economic institutions are going to create certain kinds of people.
And in the end, we're going to have to sit there and ask ourselves, but were those the kinds of people we wanted to become?
So that's that's my long-winded answer on this subject.
My defense is mostly to feel aggrieved by my...
I feel aggrieved that most of my fellow leftists, I think, falsely accuse me.
Let me put it that way.
I'm in that position of feeling like the misunderstood child, you know, the child that feels like I'm so misunderstood.
And I feel on this subject, nine out of ten people who find themselves critical of me.
I feel like the aggrieved child who is misunderstood.
But that's not a defense.
Yeah, well, I'm not sure.
This would be, of course, very much interesting to find out whether or not I misunderstand you actually.
Because, I mean, maybe we can at least try to find it out.
Because, I mean, a couple of different things, I would say.
One of them would be that the way that you describe it,
even the endogenous preferences that actually take into account that preferences change over time,
even those when you describe them, you do acknowledge that people change.
You do acknowledge that they change through their actions in some way.
But what you do leave out is this huge area of what might call collective preference formation.
So it is not only me that is involved in forming my own preferences, neither in the here and now or over time.
So, and this is if you take this kind of thinking in terms of preferences and then look at the way paracorn is set up,
then I do see some analogy because you do have these worker councils
and they interact with each other on a higher level only through parametric mediation.
And from my perspective, one would say, all right,
it's nice and fine that worker councils within their internal structures are structured democratically and self-organized and stuff like that.
But the preference formation on a higher scale is always and needs to be also a political process,
not only a communication, but a very much political process because this aspect of collective preference formation needs to be that, exactly that, collective.
But through modeling these actions in paracorn in the way that you do,
you will necessarily lead yourself into a position where you can only argue for workers councils acting with each other on a parametric level
because you do not want to interfere with the, so to speak, personal integrity of the workers councils.
So there you have this analogy.
And this is interesting to me how one relates to the other
and how I would argue both on the individual level as well as on the societal level
for an aspect which I would then call maybe collective preference formation,
which would always entail certain political aspect and political mechanisms
that are not addressed sufficiently through, for example, mere parametric mediation, I would say.
I hope I'm a bit clear.
I think I hear you.
I mean, one thing I would say is that there's actually a difference of opinion between Michael Albert and me on this subject.
Michael would accuse me of saying, Robin, you want things just to be decided, as you put it, parametrically.
And that doesn't provide enough interpersonal communication.
And interpersonal communication is both an information sharing and a learning process.
And my reaction back to him is not everybody wants to sit in meetings all day arguing with you, Michael.
And so there is a tension on this subject, even amongst those of us who advocate for a participatory economy.
Here's a second thing I'll say.
And I've said this to Michael also, which is, hey, anytime people want to have meetings and talk, I don't care.
People should have meetings and talk as much as they want.
So you can add as much inter-community.
Another way of thinking of it is, in my view, you can add as much interpersonal communication where people are sharing information and trying to come to an understanding of one another,
which is always, in some sense, search for, can we find more common ground?
Can we find consensus?
I'm not ever opposed to as much of that as anybody wants to engage in.
On the other hand, I don't want to design a system that can't work reasonably
and come to decisions in a timely way and that don't allow people to choose how much of that further discussion and communication to engage in.
And I'm also concerned that, here's again, I think there's a bias, if you take a look at progressives and leftists and socialists,
and then you look at the entire population, how much time the typical leftist wants to spend in meetings and discussions and argumentation,
compared to what a normal person is willing to put up with, normal people are ready to go fishing after an hour.
And most leftist will stay till two in the morning.
So I worry about designing a system that fits our preferences, but predictably not the preferences of a lot of other people who just aren't like us in that way.
So I am constantly looking for ways to get things done more quickly with less discussion.
I'm also looking for ways where whatever discussion goes on, there's an agenda for the discussion that somehow has a logic to it that doesn't just end us up with,
will you think this and I think that, or you feel this and I feel that, because those kinds of discussions can go on until the cows come home.
And particularly if you set up a decision making process where the decision is going to be made by whoever stays latest in the morning,
then that I really have a serious objection to. Then that one is where I'm going to stand up on my hind legs and say, no, no, no, no, there's a serious flaw there.
So those are just some thoughts on this subject.
I think there's a huge difference between our proposals about annual participatory planning in terms of how much information sharing, debate and argumentation has to go on and our proposals about investment and long term development planning.
That, although again, even in that regard, where we concentrate on is trying to identify who would have best access to information and how would they be motivated in terms of empowering them to make estimates of things that are used to draw up a plan
and involving people at the point where they have to decide the major things like just how much difference between consumption of average consumption over time.
Are we willing to tolerate the generational equity constraint and involving people with after we've got the most credible estimates of various things that are important to calculate,
what an efficient investment plan or plan over time would be.
Then I want political bodies to sit down and look at that and debate that and discuss that political bodies and eventually vote on it through legislatures or referendum.
So there's a huge difference in terms of how these development and investment plans.
We are proposing now and I've already said that that's more provisional parts of our proposals.
So I do think and we have clashed with people such as yourself over the past in this particular area.
The clash is greatest about the annual planning.
And in some ways, I think that we are more on the same wavelength and some of the sort of nagging doubts about whether this is really the process you really think is the best process.
I think that what we've now proposed about the investment and the development planning in some sense diminishes the difference between us, this sort of traditional difference between us.
Absolutely. And if you would not have said that, that was the other thing that I just wanted to add.
I think that this is a very important remark and that through these aspects of long-term planning and so forth, I think there are very important aspects being included into Paragon.
I think what I would suggest is that what I would suggest is to people like yourself, and you already have, but to other people like yourself, look at those and see whether they don't assuage one's fears in this regard to some extent, at least.
And just to get that right, I mean, in the traditional Paragon model, there was no additional political structure that accompanied a Paragon economy, is it?
There was only the model of the different elements that you sketched. There was no additional political institutional framework, no?
If you go back to our actual overall methodology, we talk about four spheres of social life, the economic sphere, the kinship sphere, which is basically gender relations and reproduction, what we call the community sphere of social life, and then the political sphere of social life.
And so participatory economics was originally really only a proposal about the economic sphere.
And without saying it was the be-all and the end-all, without saying it was necessarily more important than the political sphere or the kinship sphere or the community sphere.
And community, what we mean is historically defined communities via race or ethnicity or religion. That's what we mean by community. I don't mean community as in neighborhood.
So what's happened is now for the first time, we've sort of made some proposals about reproductive labor after very, very self-consciously not doing anything about that for a while.
And not me, but somebody named Steve Schallem has made some very specific proposals about the political sphere, which since participatory economy was called per econ, that got called per polity.
And I have not been very involved in that. I mean, I did get involved in sort of as one of the people working on the reproductive labor or reproductive activity.
I've been uninvolved really, you know, with trying to think through proposals about how the political system should work as being quite distinct from representational democracy.
And so I would recommend, I mean, what I can do in that regard is simply recommend what Steve Schallem has written on that subject.
There's also somewhat of a division in terms of websites out there for where you can find it and where you can't.
So on the www.participatoryeconomy.org website, there really isn't any material there about her polity.
Whereas if you go to the real utopia website, they feature, I mean, there's more material on the participatory economy,
but they certainly have a lot of the material up there about, you know, Steve's proposals that are in some way.
I mean, the way I would characterize them is people find our participatory economy proposals sort of in some ways outside the mainstream, even on the left.
And I think in some way, and so they're sort of bold and innovative in that sense.
I'm trying to now, I'm not trying to sell them as, well, they're bold and innovative, but they make all the sense in the world.
They're going to become majoritarian within two decades.
I also think is some very bold and innovative recommendations.
And what it's an attempt to deal with is the even in representative democracy.
The average person just feels like this has nothing to do with me.
And so I think that's that's the dilemma.
That's the problem that Steve and others who've worked on on on pair polity.
That's their starting point.
And they're basically asking, can we can we propose something that's rather dramatically different from what people most people are, you know, even have heard of or even thought about to address that issue.
And in that regard, I think that's a very, very worthy task.
But I just am not personally able to speak to it in any kind of in any sort of detailed way.
Robin, there's a last question I ask all of my guests.
And it is if you think about the future, what makes you joyful?
I find the human species interesting still.
I find the human species interesting.
And I do not, despite all evidence to the contrary, I remain optimistic that we may just figure things out.
Fantastic, Robin.
Thank you so much for your time and being part of future histories.
It's great to be on with you.
Have a great day.
That was our show for today.
Thanks a lot for listening.
If you want to support future histories, you can do so on Patreon.
For this, visit patreon.com slash future histories, or you can simply tell a friend that you like the show and that he, she or they might like it as well.
Thanks a lot and hear you in two weeks.